Add proposal about performance improvements (#737)
scylladb/scylla-operator: enhancements/proposals/perftune.md

* K8s Nodes running Scylla Pods are optimized using perftune.py
* All optimizations implemented in perftune.py land on host machine

### Non-Goals

* Revert optimizations when DaemonSet is uninstalled

## Proposal

We are going to use a privileged DaemonSet responsible for running the perftune.py script on each Node having Scylla Pod.

Because we are tuning cluster wide resources (Nodes), we cannot have a switch inside ScyllaCluster CRD.
That’s why we will expose an additional non-namespaced CRD consisting of node selector and tuning options.
Such config in future can contain more configuration/optimization options like automatic disk setup/benchmark and more.

### User Stories

#### Story 1

As a user I have several multi-purpose K8s nodes, and a couple different types of dedicated just for Scylla.
I would like to tune just those dedicated to Scylla of type i3.xlarge. Others shouldn't be touched because optimizations may interfere with other applications.

User is able to create multiple ScyllaNodeConfig to distinguish multiple types of nodes.

#### Story 2

As a user I have multiple K8s environments. I would like to save resources for development env and disable optimizations.

> User is able to completely disable Node Tuner by removing all CRs.

Reviewer: This story is a little confusing, it could be interpreted as if removing CRs somehow reverted the optimizations.

  // Controls if node performance tuning should be disabled.
  // Once enabled, K8s Nodes are going to be optimized for performance
  // by running multiple optimizations on network and storage devices.
  DisableOptimizations bool `json:"disableOptimizations"`
}
```

By default optimizations will be enabled on all not-tainted nodes, although users may filter the nodes using the `NodeSelector`, `Affinity` and `Tolerations`.
To disable optimizations users have to change `DisableOptimizations` to `true`.

#### Orchestration
Tuning Pods will be deployed as DaemonSet managed by the Operator, this means a single instance of Node Tuner will be available on each selected k8s node.  
All Perftune ConfigMaps created by the ScyllaNodeConfigs will have a OwnerReference pointing to Scylla Pod, 
and will be created in the same namespace as Scylla Pod.

Node Tuner will set up a watch on Pods with nodeName FieldSelector to get notifications about Pods creation/updates/evictions on the same node.
Perftune script requires a list of CPUs assigned to Scylla and IRQ handling.  
We don’t know which CPUs are going to be dedicated for Scylla until the Scylla container is created.  

> That’s why, node tuning Pod has to watch for Pods running on the same host.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That’s why node tuning Pod has to watch for Pods running on the same host.  
```

OwnerReferences: []metav1.OwnerReference{util.NewNodeConfigControllerRef(snc)},
```    

Perftune result ConfigMap:
```
Labels: {
  "scylla-operator.scylladb.com/node-config":           snc.Name,
  "scylla-operator.scylladb.com/node-config-controller" : sncPod.Name,
},
OwnerReferences: []metav1.OwnerReference{util.NewNodeConfigControllerRef(snc)},
}
```

Perftune Job:
```
Labels: map[string]string{
  "scylla-operator.scylladb.com/node-config":           snc.Name,
  "scylla-operator.scylladb.com/node-config-controller": sncPod.Name,
},
OwnerReferences: []metav1.OwnerReference{util.NewNodeConfigControllerRef(snc)},
```

### Test Plan

We are not going to test if each individual optimization was applied to the host machine, but instead we are going to 
observe if a corresponding ConfigMap is created for each Scylla Pod.
Node Affinity/Tolerations are going to be tested in unit tests. 
E2E are going to cover ConfigMaps and DaemonSet reconcilation.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

DaemonSet definition will be reconciled by the Operator and annotated with hash of definition. 
Hash annotation will make sure that newer/older version of DaemonSet is deployed. 

### Version Skew Strategy

> For the short period of time DaemonSet and Operator version may differ. Because these components doesn't talk to each other directly, version mismatch doesn't matter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a short period of time DaemonSet and Operator versions may differ. Because these components don't talk to each other directly, version mismatch doesn't matter.
```

In order to restore them, k8s node has to be restarted. Later we can think about fixing that.

When irqbalancer is running on the host, script is banning CPUs assigned to handle IRQ inside irqbalancer config file, and initiates a restart.  
We need a shared Host PID namespace for that.

### CPU assignment discovery

Perftune script requires a list of CPUs assigned to Scylla and IRQ handling.  
We don’t know which CPUs are going to be dedicated for Scylla until the Scylla container is created.
When Scylla Pod lands, tuning Pod lists containers running on the host to check allocated resources and calculate CPU masks for Scylla and IRQ handling.

Only single supported Cloud Provider (EKS) exposes cpuset via Container Runtime Interface.
ScyllaNodeConfig Pod is going to first check if Scylla container cpuset is available in CRI. If not, it will fallback to
manually reading it from cgroup virtual filesystem on host machine mounted as a volume.

#### RBAC

The DaemonSet is going to use separate ServiceAccount with ClusterRole with read permissions for Pods and write permissions for Events and ConfigMaps, Jobs.
RBAC resources will be reconciled by the Operator.

#### Labels and ownership

> Owner of all resources created by the ScyllaNodeConfig Pods will be a ScyllaNodeConfig instance.

Reviewer 2: should the owners be more cascading? like the pod owns the appropriate CM ( with its UID ), the pod is owned by the DS and the DS is owned by the nodeconfig

DaemonSet:
```
Labels: {
  "scylla-operator.scylladb.com/node-config": snc.Name,
}
OwnerReferences: []metav1.OwnerReference{util.NewNodeConfigControllerRef(snc)},
```    

Perftune result ConfigMap:
```
Labels: {
  "scylla-operator.scylladb.com/node-config":           snc.Name,
},
OwnerReferences: []metav1.OwnerReference{util.NewNodeConfigControllerRef(snc)},
}
```

Perftune Job selector contains additional label with node name value to distinguish jobs managed by different SNC Pods.
```
Labels: map[string]string{
  "scylla-operator.scylladb.com/node-config":           snc.Name,
  "scylla-operator.scylladb.com/node-config-controller": nodeName,
},
OwnerReferences: []metav1.OwnerReference{util.NewNodeConfigControllerRef(snc)},
```

### Test Plan

We are not going to test if each individual optimization was applied to the host machine, but instead we are going to
observe if a corresponding ConfigMap is created for each Scylla Pod.

Unit tests are going to cover IRQ mask calculation and Pod cpuset discovery.
E2E are going to cover ConfigMaps and DaemonSet reconcilation.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

> DaemonSet definition will be reconciled by the Operator and annotated with hash of definition.

Reviewer 2: Q: what happens on downgrade when scylla pods already contain the logic to wait for the CM but nobody creates it?
